
MT3DMS UPGRADE INFORMATION

Chunmiao Zheng (czheng@ua.edu)
Department of Geological Sciences
University of Alabama
Tuscaloosa, AL 35487, USA


Version History

3.00.A: June 1998, initial release
3.00.B: May 1999
3.50.A: November 1999
3.50.B: August 2000
4.00:   August 2001



Release [3.00.A] June 1998

Initial release.


Release [3.00.B] May 1999

Bug Fixes:

1. Fix an 'array out of bound' error in subroutine MIC of the GCG package.
   This error has no effect if the array bound-checking option of the Fortran
   compiler is not turned on.

2. Fix a problem related to the assignment of initial concentrations for
   the sorbed/immobile phase in the RCT package.  When the nonequilibrium
   sorption is simulated, by default the initial concentrations for the
   sorbed phase are assumed to be in equilibrium with the dissolved phase.
   When the dual-domain mass transfer is simulated, by default the initial
   concentrations for the immobile phase are assumed to be zero.  The user
   has the option to override the default values by specifying their own
   values in the RCT input file.  However, because of a bug in the previous
   version, the default values are always used regardless of user input.

3. Fix a potential minor problem in determining the transport stepsize
   required for explicit solution of the dual-domain mass transfer reaction.

Enhancements:

1. Reorganize the main program slightly to facilitate the addition of
   multispecies reaction packages into MT3DMS.


Release [3.50.A] November 1999

Bug Fixes:

1. Fix a problem which may lead to inaccurate solutions when first-order
   irreversible reaction (radioactive decay or biodegradation) is used in
   conjunction with nonequilibrium sorption or dual-domain mass transfer.

2. Fix a potential floating point overflow error in determining the maximum
   transport stepsize required for explicit solution of the dispersion term.

Enhancements:

1. Add a new option for simulating dual-domain mass transfer in the presence
   of linear sorption (refer to the User's Manual, revised November 1999).
   This option is implemented as ISOTHM=6 in the reaction (RCT) package, and
   replaces the original dual-domain mass transfer option ISOTHM=5.  While
   ISOTHM=5 is kept in the program for compatibility considerations, ISOTHM=5
   is equivalent to ISOTHM=6 with the first sorption constant SP1 (Kd) set to
   zero.

2. Add a new option for specifying fluid sources directly through a mass-
   loading rate [QC] (M/T) instead of a concentration [C] (M/L^3) for the
   source flux (refer to the User's Manual, revised November 1999).  This
   option allows the user to specify a source for the transport model without
   first specifying a flow rate [Q] in the flow model.

3. Improve the program structure for keeping track of global mass budgets and
   reporting mass balance information, particularly for transport simulation
   in dual-domain systems or under transient flow conditions.

4. Improve the performance of the Generalized Conjugate-Gradient (GCG) matrix
   solver.


Release [3.50.B] August 2000

Bug Fixes:

1. Fix a problem related to the first-order kinetic reaction.  In Version
   3.50.A, when the first-order kinetic reaction is simulated (IREACT=1) but
   no sorption (or dual-domain mass transfer) is included in the simulation
   (ISOTHM=0), the concentration change due to the reaction is not properly
   updated if the user chooses the explicit solution scheme, i.e., the GCG
   solver package is not turned on.  This bug only occurs with Version
   3.50.A, and has no effect if the user turns on the GCG solver package, or
   if the sorption or mass transfer is simulated along with the kinetic
   reaction.

2. Fix a potential problem related to the mass-loading point source
   (ITYPE=15) implemented since Version 3.50.A.  The problem causes more mass
   to be added than the specified mass loading rate after the first stress
   period.  This bug only occurs when the flow model is steady state but the
   transport model has multiple stress periods to accommodate the changes in
   the mass loading rate.

Other Modifications:

1. Modify the use of the 'minimum saturated thickness [THKMIN]' option.
   The THKMIN option is used to turn off (made inactive) those cells in the
   unconfined model layers where the saturated thickness is negligible
   relative to the total thickness of the cell (DZ).  The purpose for using
   this option to avoid the situation in which a cell with a negligible
   saturated thickness severely restricts the transport step size for the
   entire model.  When the saturated thickness is above the specified minimum
   in a new flow time step, the cell that has been turned off is re-activated
   (made active).  In this version, the THKMIN option is not used by default.
   In other words, if the user does not specify any value for THKMIN, it is
   equivalent to setting THKMIN=0, i.e., the cell is turned off only if the
   hydraulic head at the cell is below or equal to the bottom elevation of
   the cell.  The user can specify any value between 0 and 0.05 for THKMIN,
   i.e., when the saturated thickness at any cell is below 0 to 5% of the
   total cell thickness (DZ), the cell would be made inactive.  If the user
   specifies a value greater than 0.05 (5%), the user-specified value is
   reset to the default value of 0.01 (1%).

2. Modify the method for assigning the non-default concentration of point
   sources (wells, rivers, etc.) in simulations with multiple stress periods.
   In previous versions, the concentration of a point source, once specified
   for a particular stress period, will stay the same for the remaining
   stress periods.  Therefore, to turn off a user-specified point source in a
   subsequent stress period, it is necessary to re-define the source in the
   input file with its concentration set to zero.  In this version, the
   concentration of any source specified for a stress period is only valid
   for that stress period alone.  In a simulation with multiple stress
   periods, the user can either choose the ‘REUSE’ option to reuse all point
   source information from a previous stress period, or specify all the point
   sources for each stress period.  Note that an exception to the above
   general rule is the handling of time-varying constant-concentration cells.
   A constant-concentration cell, once defined, will remain a constant-
   concentration cell for the entire duration of the simulation.  The user
   can assign different concentration values for a constant-concentration
   cell at different stress periods, but cannot change a constant-
   concentration cell back to a regular active cell.


Release [4.00] August 2001

Bug Fixes and Other Modifications:

1. Fix problems related to the third-order TVD solver (subroutine CFACE in
   the source file of the Advection Package).  In previous versions, the TVD
   solver may become unstable or result in large negative concentration
   values, particularly when applied to field-scale problems with irregular
   model geometries.  In the current version, the performance of the TVD
   solver is improved by making adjustments near the inactive cells and by
   implementing a more robust form of the flux limiter.

Enhancements:

1. Support MODFLOW-2000 through a new version of the Link-MT3DMS Package
   (LMT6).  Information on the LMT6 Package for MODFLOW-2000 is provided in
   the U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 01-82 by Zheng, Hill and Hsieh
   (2001), available at http://water.usgs.gov/software/ground_water.html.

2. Add support for additional MODFLOW sink/source packages.  The MODFLOW
   sink/source packages supported by the previous versions of MT3DMS (prior
   to 4.00) include Well (WEL), Drain (DRN), Recharge (RCH),
   Evapotranspiration (EVT), River (RIV), General-Head-Dependent Boundary
   (GHB), and Time-Varying Constant-Head Boundary (CHD).  In addition, the
   Streamflow-Routing Package (STR) can be supported through the River option
   if the two are not used in the flow simulation simultaneously.  MT3DMS 4.0
   supports two new packages, the Reservoir (RES) and Specified Flow and Head
   Boundary (FHB).  Furthermore, it allows the simultaneous use of the RIV
   and STR Packages in the flow simulation.  Finally, MT3DMS 4.0 includes new
   options which make it simple and easy to support more MODFLOW sink/source
   packages in the future.

3. Add a new method to start a MT3DMS simulation through a name file that is
   similar to the name file used by MODFLOW-2000.  The name file contains the
   names of most input and output files used in a model simulation and
   controls the parts of the model program that are active.  In addition, it
   is possible to override the default names assigned to several MT3DMS
   optional output files (e.g., MT3D001.UCN, MT3D001.OBS, and MT3D001.MAS)
   through the name file.  For more information on the MT3DMS name file, see
   Zheng, Hill and Hsieh (2001) and the file ‘readme.txt’ included with the
   MT3DMS 4.0 distribution files.


