
MT3DMS UPGRADE INFORMATION


Version History

DoD_3.00.A: June 1998, initial release
DoD_3.00.B: May 1999
DoD_3.50.A: November 1999


Release [DoD_3.00.A] June 1998

Initial release.


Release [DoD_3.00.B] May 1999

Bug Fixes:
1.	Fix an 'array out of bound' error in subroutine MIC of the GCG package.  
This error has no effect if the array bound-checking option of the Fortran 
compiler is not turned on.
2.	Fix a problem related to the assignment of initial concentrations for the 
sorbed/immobile phase in the RCT package.  When the nonequilibrium 
sorption is simulated, by default the initial concentrations for the 
sorbed phase are assumed to be in equilibrium with the dissolved phase.  
When the dual-domain mass transfer is simulated, by default the initial 
concentrations for the immobile phase are assumed to be zero.  The user 
has the option to override the default values by specifying their own 
values in the RCT input file.  However, because of a bug in the previous 
version, the default values are always used regardless of user input.
3.	Fix a potential minor problem in determining the transport stepsize 
required for explicit solution of the dual-domain mass transfer reaction.

Enhancements:
1.	Reorganize the main program slightly to facilitate the addition of 
multispecies reaction packages into MT3DMS.


Release [DoD_3.50.A] November 1999

Bug Fixes:
1.	Fix a problem with may lead to inaccurate solutions when first-order 
irreversible reaction (radioactive decay or biodegradation) is used in 
conjunction with nonequilibrium sorption or dual-domain mass transfer.
2.	Fix a potential floating point overflow error in determining the maximum 
transport stepsize required for explicit solution of the dispersion term.

Enhancements:
1.	Add a new option for simulating dual-domain mass transfer in the presence 
of linear sorption (refer to the User's Manual, revised November 1999).  
This option is implemented as ISOTHM=6 in the reaction (RCT) package, and 
replaces the original dual-domain mass transfer option ISOTHM=5.  While 
ISOTHM=5 is kept in the program for compatibility considerations, ISOTHM=5 
is equivalent to ISOTHM=6 with the first sorption constant SP1 (Kd) set to 
zero.
2.	Add a new option for specifying fluid sources directly through a mass-
loading rate [QC] (M/T) instead of a concentration [C] (M/L^3) for the 
source flux (refer to the User's Manual, revised November 1999).  This 
option allows the user to specify a source for the transport model without 
first specifying a flow rate [Q] in the flow model.
3.	Improve the program structure for keeping track of global mass budgets and 
reporting mass balance information, particularly for transport simulation 
in dual-domain systems or under transient flow conditions.
4.	Improve the performance of the Generalized Conjugate-Gradient (GCG) matrix 
solver.
