MT3DMS UPGRADE INFORMATION
Chunmiao Zheng
Department of Geological Sciences
University of Alabama
202 Bevill Building
Tuscaloosa, AL 35487, USA
czheng@ua.edu

Version History
5.30:
5.20:
5.10:
5.00:
4.50:
4.00:
3.50.B:
3.50.A:
3.00.B:
3.00.A:

February 2010
October 2006
October 2005
February 2005
May 2003
August 2001
August 2000
November 1999
May 1999
June 1998, initial release

Release [3.00.A] June 1998
Initial release.

Release [3.00.B] May 1999
Bug Fixes:
1. Fix an ‘array out of bound’ error in subroutine MIC of the GCG package.
This error has no effect if the array bound-checking option of the
Fortran compiler is not turned on.
2. Fix a problem related to the assignment of initial concentrations for the
sorbed/immobile phase in the RCT package. When the nonequilibrium
sorption is simulated, by default the initial concentrations for the
sorbed phase are assumed to be in equilibrium with those for the
dissolved phase. When the dual-domain mass transfer is simulated, by
default the initial concentrations for the immobile phase are assumed to
be zero. The user has the option to override the default values by
specifying their own values in the RCT input file. However, because of a
bug in the previous version, the default values are always used
regardless of user input.
3. Fix a potential minor problem in determining the transport stepsize
required for the explicit solution of the dual-domain mass transfer
reaction.
Enhancements:
1. Reorganize the main program slightly to facilitate the addition of
multispecies reaction packages into MT3DMS.

Release [3.50.A] November 1999
Bug Fixes:
1. Fix a problem which may lead to inaccurate solutions when first-order
irreversible reaction (radioactive decay or biodegradation) is used in
conjunction with nonequilibrium sorption or dual-domain mass transfer.
2. Fix a potential floating point overflow error in determining the maximum
transport stepsize required for explicit solution of the dispersion term.
Enhancements:
1. Add a new option for simulating dual-domain mass transfer in the presence
of linear sorption (refer to the User's Manual, revised November 1999).
This option is implemented as ISOTHM=6 in the reaction (RCT) package, and
replaces the original dual-domain mass transfer option ISOTHM=5. While
ISOTHM=5 is kept in the program for compatibility considerations,
ISOTHM=5 is equivalent to ISOTHM=6 with the first sorption constant SP1
(Kd) set to zero.
2. Add a new option for specifying fluid sources directly through a massloading rate [QC] (M/T) instead of a concentration [C] (M/L^3) for the
source flux (refer to the User's Manual, revised November 1999). This
option allows the user to specify a source for the transport model
without first specifying a flow rate [Q] in the flow model.
3. Improve the program structure for keeping track of global mass budgets
and reporting mass balance information, particularly for transport
simulation in dual-domain systems or under transient flow conditions.
4. Improve the performance of the Generalized Conjugate-Gradient (GCG)
matrix solver.

Release [3.50.B] August 2000
Bug Fixes:
1. Fix a problem related to the first-order kinetic reaction. In Version
3.50.A, when the first-order kinetic reaction is simulated (IREACT=1) but
no sorption (or dual-domain mass transfer) is included in the simulation
(ISOTHM=0), the concentration change due to the reaction is not properly
updated if the user chooses the explicit solution scheme, i.e., the GCG
solver package is not turned on. This bug only occurs with Version
3.50.A, and has no effect if the user turns on the GCG solver package, or
if the sorption or mass transfer is simulated along with the kinetic
reaction.
2. Fix a potential problem related to the mass-loading point source
(ITYPE=15) implemented since Version 3.50.A. The problem causes more
mass to be added than the specified mass loading rate after the first
stress period. This bug only occurs when the flow model is steady state
but the transport model has multiple stress periods to accommodate the
changes in the mass loading rate.
Other Modifications:
1. Modify the use of the “minimum saturated thickness [THKMIN]” option. The
THKMIN option is used to turn off (made inactive) those cells in the
unconfined model layers where the saturated thickness is negligible
relative to the total thickness of the cell (DZ). The purpose for using
this option to avoid the situation in which a cell with a negligible

saturated thickness severely restricts the transport step size for the
entire model. When the saturated thickness is above the specified
minimum in a new flow time step, the cell that has been turned off is reactivated (made active). In this version, the THKMIN option is not used
by default. In other words, if the user does not specify any value for
THKMIN, it is equivalent to setting THKMIN=0, i.e., the cell is turned
off only if the hydraulic head at the cell is below or equal to the
bottom elevation of the cell. The user can specify any value between 0
and 0.05 for THKMIN, i.e., when the saturated thickness at any cell is
below 0 to 5% of the total cell thickness (DZ), the cell would be made
inactive. If the user specifies a value greater than 0.05 (5%), the
user-specified value is reset to the default value of 0.01 (1%).
2. Modify the method for assigning the non-default concentration of point
sources (wells, rivers, etc.) in simulations with multiple stress
periods. In previous versions, the concentration of a point source, once
specified for a particular stress period, will stay the same for the
remaining stress periods. Therefore, to turn off a user-specified point
source in a subsequent stress period, it is necessary to re-define the
source in the input file with its concentration set to zero. In this
version, the concentration of any source specified for a stress period is
only valid for that stress period alone. In a simulation with multiple
stress periods, the user can either choose the ‘REUSE’ option to reuse
all point source information from a previous stress period, or specify
all the point sources for each stress period. Note that an exception to
the above general rule is the handling of time-varying constantconcentration cells. A constant-concentration cell, once defined, will
remain a constant-concentration cell for the entire duration of the
simulation. The user can assign different concentration values for a
constant-concentration cell at different stress periods, but cannot
change a constant-concentration cell back to a regular active cell.

Release [4.00] August 2001
Bug Fixes and Other Modifications:
1. Fix problems related to the third-order TVD solver (subroutine CFACE in
the source file of the Advection Package). In previous versions, the TVD
solver may become unstable or result in large negative concentration
values, particularly when applied to field-scale problems with irregular
model geometries. In the current version, the performance of the TVD
solver is improved by making adjustments near the inactive cells and by
implementing a more robust form of the flux limiter.
Enhancements:
1. Support MODFLOW-2000 through a new version of the Link-MT3DMS Package
(LMT6). Information on the LMT6 Package for MODFLOW-2000 is provided in
the U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 01-82 by Zheng, Hill and
Hsieh (2001), available at
http://water.usgs.gov/software/ground_water.html.
2. Add support for additional MODFLOW sink/source packages. The MODFLOW
sink/source packages supported by the previous versions of MT3DMS (prior
to 4.00) include Well (WEL), Drain (DRN), Recharge (RCH),
Evapotranspiration (EVT), River (RIV), General-Head-Dependent Boundary
(GHB), and Time-Varying Constant-Head Boundary (CHD). In addition, the
Streamflow-Routing Package (STR) can be supported through the River
option if the two are not used in the flow simulation simultaneously.

MT3DMS 4.0 supports two new packages, the Reservoir (RES) and Specified
Flow and Head Boundary (FHB). Furthermore, it allows the simultaneous
use of the RIV and STR Packages in the flow simulation. Finally, MT3DMS
4.0 includes new options which make it simple and easy to support more
MODFLOW sink/source packages in the future.
3. Add a new method to start a MT3DMS simulation through a name file that is
similar to the name file used by MODFLOW-2000. The name file contains
the names of most input and output files used in a model simulation and
controls the parts of the model program that are active. In addition, it
is possible to override the default names assigned to several MT3DMS
optional output files (e.g., MT3D001.UCN, MT3D001.OBS, and MT3D001.MAS)
through the name file. For more information on the MT3DMS name file, see
Zheng, Hill and Hsieh (2001) and the file ‘readme.txt’ included with the
MT3DMS 4.0 distribution files.

Release [4.50] May 2003
Bug Fixes and Other Modifications:
1. Fix a problem related to the ‘reuse’ option in the Sink/Source Mixing
(SSM) Package. If a model includes a certain number of point sources
with user-specified concentrations, the cell locations, source types and
concentration values must be specified in the SSM Package input file for
the first stress period. For subsequent stress periods, the number of
point sources with specified concentrations can be set to -1 to reuse the
point source information entered for the first stress period. A problem
in Version 4.00 may cause the option to function incorrectly under
certain circumstances.
2. Fix a problem in the array reader RARRAY which can lead to incorrect
input of an external binary file such as the unformatted concentration
(UCN) file saved from a previous run and used as the initial
concentrations for a restart run. This problem occurs only when the
unformatted files used by MT3DMS are defined as unstructured true-binary
files (FORM=’binary’ or ACCESS=’transparent’). For standard unformatted
files (FORM=’unformatted’ and ACCESS=’sequential’), the array reader
RARRAY functions properly.
3. Fix a problem in the General-Conjugate-Gradient (GCG) Package which can
cause the GCG solver to fail to converge when a 1D model is oriented
along a column (y axis) or vertically (z axis). This problem does not
occur if the 1D model is oriented along a row (x axis).
4. Fix a problem related to printing of simulation results at user-specified
times. This problem can cause MT3DMS to skip printing the simulation
results at one or more user-specified times under some rare
circumstances.
5. Allow the transport options (packages) to be activated through the MT3DMS
NameFile without changing the relevant input file record (TRNOP) in the
BTN Package input file. This is consistent with the NameFile method of
opening files as used in MODFLOW-96 and MODFLOW-2000. The input record
TRNOP in the BTN Package input file no longer has any effect if the
NameFile method is used to open the input/output files for MT3DMS.
Enhancements:
1. Add an option to save the sorbed-phase or immobile-liquid-phase
concentrations in unformatted concentration (UCN) files if sorption or
dual-domain mass transfer is included in the simulation. The file is
named by default as MT3DnnnS.UCN, where nnn indicates the species index

number. (The default names can be overridden through the MT3DMS
NameFile.) If sorption is simulated but not dual-domain mass transfer,
the sorbed-phase concentration is saved. If dual-domain mass transfer is
simulated (either without or with sorption), the immobile-liquid-phase
concentration is saved instead. The unit for the sorbed-phase
concentration is expressed in terms of sorbed mass per unit mass of bulk
soil matrix. The unit for the immobile-liquid-phase concentration is
expressed in terms of mass per unit volume of fluid. The structure of
sorbed-phase or immobile-liquid-phase UCN files is identical to that of
dissolved-phase UCN files so that the former can be processed in the same
manner as the latter.

Release [5.00] February 2005
Major Changes:
1. The name-file procedure is now the only method to start a MT3DMS
simulation run. A name-file specifies the names of most input and output
files used in a model simulation. In addition, it controls the parts of
the model program that are active, i.e., the “packages” that are used in
the current simulation. As a result, the “TRNOP” array in the BTN input
file is no longer used. However a dummy input line must still remain
where the “TRNOP” is formerly specified.
2. The optional implicit matrix solver, the General Conjugate-Gradient (GCG)
solver, must now be used in every simulation. In other words, the
dispersion, sink/source and reaction terms are now always solved by the
implicit finite-difference method, regardless of whether the advection
term is solved by the implicit finite-difference method, the mixed
Eulerian-Lagrangian methods, or the third-order TVD method.
3. A single finite-difference cell may now contain multiple sinks/sources of
the same type, for example, multiple wells. If this is the case, it is
necessary to assign the source concentrations individually if all of them
act as sources of specified concentrations.
Enhancements:
1. Add a new Transport Observation (TOB) Package as documented in Zheng
(2005) to save the calculated concentration at any model cell and the
calculated mass flux at any sink/source location. The calculated values
are saved to output files, and optionally, along with the statistics of
residuals between the calculated and observed values at the observation
locations. The calculated concentrations can be interpolated from the
nodal values if the observation point does not coincide with a model
node. The calculated mass flux can be defined over any arbitrary group
of sink/source cells referred to as a mass flux object.
2. Support the Multi-Node Well (MNW) Package (Halford and Hanson, 2002) used
by MODFLOW-2000 to simulate the flow to a well screened over multiple
nodes (layers). The MNW Package automatically partitions the total flow
prescribed for a MNW into individual nodes (layers) and determines a
single head value in the wellbore. Accordingly, MT3DMS v5 computes a
single composite concentration for the same wellbore based on the fluxweighted concentrations of the injected fluid (if any) and the flow rates
from different layers.
3. Add support for additional MODFLOW sink/source packages, including Drain
with Return Flow (DRT) and Evapotranspiration with a Segmented Function
(ETS), both documented in Banta (2000). The DRT package simulates the
reinjection of a portion of the outflow from a drain cell back into the

aquifer. MT3DMS assigns the concentration at the outflow cell as that of
the reinjected source at the return drain-flow location. The ETS package
is supported in a manner similar to the original EVT package.

Release [5.10] October 2005
Bugs Fixes and Other Modifications:
1. Fix a bug with the mass loading option (ISSTYPE=15) in the Sink/Source
Mixing (SSM) Package. This bug was introduced in version 5.00 and might
cause some mass loading source to be skipped. The bug occurs only when
the particle-based solution techniques (MOC/MMOC/HMOC) are used.
2. Improve the handling of the mass loading option when used with the
MOC/MMOC/HMOC solution techniques.
3. Fix a bug in the Link-MT3DMS (LMT6) Package that is distributed with
MODFLOW-2000 v1.15.01 (April 5, 2005). This bug may cause the flow term
from the Multi-Node Well (MNW) Package to be incorrectly saved in the
flow-transport link file needed by MT3DMS. The bug fix is available in
MODFLOW-2000 later than v1.15.01.
Enhancements:
1. Add an option to simulate zeroth-order decay or production as documented
in Zheng (2005). The standard MT3DMS code prior to version 5.10 includes
only the first-order kinetic reactions in the Chemical Reaction (RCT)
Package. However, zeroth-order reactions may be useful for describing
certain types of biogeochemical decay or production. In addition,
zeroth-order reactions can be used for direct simulation of groundwater
ages or calculation of parameter sensitivities.

Release [5.20] October 2006
Bugs Fixes and Other Modifications:
1. Fix a bug in the TOB Package which may affect the mass flux object
calculation for recharge and evapotranspiration.
2. Fix a potential problem in the BTN Package which may lead to abnormal
program termination when the fully implicit finite-difference scheme is
used with the transport stepsize multiplier set to greater than 1.0 and
when the simulation requires a very large number of transport steps.
Enhancements:
1. Add an option to include three-dimensional multicomponent diffusion
coefficients in the transport simulation as documented in Zheng (2006).
The standard MT3DMS code prior to version 5.20 only allows the input of
a single uniform diffusion coefficient per model layer and the same
diffusion coefficient for all solute components.
2. Add an option to simulate the effect of a recirculation well whose input
concentration is equal to the output concentration at an extraction
well. See Zheng (2006) for more information.

Release [5.30] February 2010
Bugs Fixes and Other Modifications:
1. Minor changes in the SSM and FMI Packages to work with the Link-MT3DMS
Package (LMT7) added to MODFLOW-2005 since v1.8.

Enhancements:
1. Add a new capability to specify an arbitrary time-varying mass loading
source or boundary condition. This capability is accomplished through a
new package, called the Hydrocarbon Spill Source (HSS) Package, that has
been developed for MT3DMS v5.3 (Zheng et al., 2010).
2. Add a new steady-state transport simulation option. This option may be
useful for long-term transport simulation runs in which the concentration
field reaches an equilibrium state with the net change in total mass
equal to zero. Also, direct groundwater age simulation usually requires a
steady-state concentration solution.
3. Add a new section to the user’s guide on the use of MT3DMS for heat
transport modeling based on the mathematical equivalency between the heat
and solute transport equations.

